
---
layout: page
title: Course Reflection
permalink: /archives
---
Taking URT-150, or as it is more commonly known, Writing Seminar, has been a completely new experience for me. In the past, all of my academic writing was restricted and limited, always bound to the rubric of research papers and experimental analysis articles. This class exposed me firsthand to the world of creative writing and the fact that even creative writing in the sense of research is possible. Over the course of the class, my view on academic writing changed drastically. Gone were the days of assigned topics and stringent paper requirements. These were replaced with complete freedom over what I wanted to write about and what I wanted to include in my papers. Looking past the educational realm, and there are almost an infinite number of ways I can put what I've learned from URT-150 to use, from technical writing in the engineering field to online review articles in the technology field. No matter what career I decide to pursue, I will have the writing skills I acquired in this class to support me.

There are a number of projects included in this portfolio, a rhetorical precis, a synthesis essay, a rhetorical analysis, and a research paper to be exact. I've learned a great deal from all of these assignments including many skills which may be appealing to future employers. From the rhetorical precis, I have learned how to summarize texts, not only based on the the content, but also the delivery of said content. This skill is great for note-taking and condensing an entire text into a short, concise paragraph. From the synthesis essay, I wasn't introduced to any new skills as this type of writing is primarily used in the pre-college academic world. However, my synthesis skills, or the ability to link multiple sources together to support a thesis was greatly improved. The rhetorical analysis was an interesting project, as it had very few restrictions. I was allowed to choose any topic and analyze it. Being an avid esports player, I decided to go with the topic of Overwatch and how Blizzard Entertainment decided to promote its launch. This project taught me how to view company-consumer interactions at a deeper level. Almost everything done by Blizzard relating to the launch was done to increase consumer trust using various rhetorical methods. This ability to isolate the true intent of writing will be a key skill in the post-college world. The research project was another freeform project, although this time I decided to go with the topic of internet memes instead of gaming. This project taught me a great deal about conducting my own case studies about a topic I am interested in. It also improved on my ability to provide coherent links to other scholarly works in order to help support my thesis.

Career-wise, I would say that this course has drastically improved my potential functionality in the corporate realm. With my current career goals centered around the engineering and technology industry, I am sure that the rhetorical skills I have picked up will make me a prime candidate for many companies. In addition, I can use these skills in the rest of my undergraduate program as every class, no matter what the subject, will involve some time of rhetorical writing.

Constructing this e-portfolio was actually quite simple. Since I already had a background in web development, creating my own blog/website was already a skill I was fluent in. Hence, the only real construction which had to be done to create the e-portfolio was to modify a previous blog project to suit its needs. Design choices were also pretty straightforward. Following Google's Material Design Guidelines got me through most of the initial design choices. These guidelines are a set of rules for web developers to follow in order to provide a professional aesthetic to their work. This all leads into me having prepared a site which houses my best academic work and provides information about me to potential employers, all while maintaining an appealing, organized layout.
