---
layout: post
title:  "Research Paper"
categories: General
author: Ethan Mui
highlight: false
image: http://imgur.com/a/NyjDQ
---
The word “meme” is quite a popular term on the internet in this day and age. It is unlikely a Facebook feed or a Reddit front page would ever be missing a meme or two. Although memes are a staple in modern day social media, the first memes actually gained popularity before the rise of computers. During World War I, allied servicemen would draw or doodle a bald man with an elongated nose next to the text “Kilroy was here” wherever they set foot. Soldiers following them would then take solace in the fact that other troops had been there before them. The term “meme” wasn’t even known before 1976 when Richard Dawkins coined the term as an explanation for how cultural information spreads among humans. Following the path of this definition, the question of why memes spread and become so popular arises. How does a simple image of a frog on a unicycle or someone’s white shoes spread to every corner of the internet within days of their origin? The answer to this question lies in the properties of the image itself. Traits such as repeatability and ease of recreation, serendipitous creation intent, and emotional response are the key components of what causes a meme to go viral. Once these traits are recognized as the main factors behind meme success, understanding the ever-shifting internet culture of the current day becomes much simpler.

The reason why memes go viral cannot be understood without defining the word “meme” itself. As mentioned before, memes refer to an element of social culture which is passed from person to person, usually with a slight modification. For example, one of the internet’s most popular memes was the RickRoll. This was a trend which gained popularity during 2005 and consisted of people appending Rick Astley’s single, “Never Gonna Give You Up” to other videos and attempting to trick others into watching the edited video. After this trend started, it went on for years, with each and every iteration of the meme being slightly different. Each time, either the original video would be changed, the time at which it cut out to the song, or even the version of the song itself. However, these all had one thing in common, and that was the presence of Astley’s song. It is this repeating nature which causes memes to be related to viruses, spawning the term “going viral,” meaning to gain massive popularity and following. This example highlights the key role repeatability plays within general meme reception. 

Repeatability and ease of recreation are key characteristics which almost every popular meme obtain, as shown in a video by Ryan Larkin, a reporter for Business Insider, "From Harlem Shake to RickRoll - Here's What Makes Memes Go Viral." These traits refer to how well the meme can be edited and reposted online by different people. For example, a meme which references a topic only a small percentage of people will understand will not have a good chance of spreading. Although it may spread rapidly within the small subset of people who can fully understand the reference, people who cannot connect to the reference simply won’t find it interesting. Images or videos which usually become memes are of well-known celebrities, world-wide events, or sometimes don’t even have any real backstory to them at all, other than just being entertaining to look at. Take popular memes “Charlie Bit My Finger” and the “Not Bad” face for example. The former is simply a cute video of two toddlers playing together which went viral for the sole reason of being a cute video and the latter is a caption overlapping a picture of Barrack Obama, going viral because of the candid face the president was making. All these cases involve scenarios where people can recreate a popular image with their own personal touch. In the scenario of an inside joke turning into a meme, this can only be referenced and recreated by only those who are in on the joke, almost eliminating the repeatability factor which make memes gain popularity. 

Repeatability does not only involve how many people understand the meme, however. According to “Predicting Meme Success with Linguistic Features in a Multilayer Backpropagation Network,” an article by University of Memphis student Keith Shubeck, research has shown that memes involving swear words were 1.77 times less likely to be successful than those which didn’t. This can be explained by a low level of repeatability. With the internet being a fairly recent innovation, many of the net’s users are children. While derogatory memes may be funny to adults and teenagers, it fails to win over the child audience, one of the largest sectors of the internet’s user population with 95% of 8-11-year-old children having accessed the internet at some point in their lives (O’Neale, 2011). The same study also shows that template style memes were 2.2 times more likely to go viral and short caption memes were 2.8 times more likely to go viral. This can be seen in the real world as memes such as “Pepe the Frog” and “Me Gusta” both gained large amounts of usage. Both of these memes involved simple 1-2 word captions and almost always the same image. Shubeck’s statistics and multiple real world examples support the claim that ease of recreation plays a huge role in the popularity of memes, further increasing knowledge of internet culture. 
	
Another large factor influencing meme popularity is whether or not the meme was created with the sole intent of being a meme. One of the most distinguishing features of memes is the fact that nobody can predict what image may become one and when. While it is true that it is easy to rule out situations where a meme would definitely not exist, it exponentially more difficult to look at a collection of images and pick out the next month’s new trend. In fact, people will actually view purposely created memes negatively, as shown by a famous ad attempt by Progressive Insurance. In a commercial titled, “Meme,” the main spokesperson tries to appeal to the audience by recreating a popular template meme, with white block text on the top and bottom of an image. Although this ad does follow the general meme convention at the time, it was downvoted by 93% of people who rated the ad. Even though repeatability is the key to creating a popular meme, the concept of creating a meme with the sole purpose of it becoming a meme or to gain revenue is regarded as taboo. This shows how the internet population reacts negatively to certain creation intents of memes and gives insight into the trending thoughts on using memes for monetary gain and trying to force popularity.
	
The article, “What Makes a Video Go Viral? An Analysis of Emotional Contagion and Internet Memes,” by National Science Foundation researchers Rosanna E. Guadagno, Daniel M. Rempala, Shannon Murphy, and Bradley M. Okdie, shows that emotion is probably the most important factor in determining the chances for a meme to become popular. Images which are not found funny by many people or images which don’t trigger any emotion at all within a person are unlikely to make it to the top of the list for meme virality. An experiment conducted to test the rates of which content would be forwarded based on the viewer’s opinion of the content’s emotional footprint. In the experiment, it was found that people were most likely to share videos which triggered a comedic emotional response. In contrast, videos which triggered an angry or sad emotional response were shared less frequently. A follow up study was carried out after this and it was also found that compared to a control video consisting of no extreme emotional content, even negative emotional content was shared more, showing that emotion-inducing content in general is a key factor in meme popularity spread and that the general human population values this sense of emotion in the content they view and share.

Looking at past meme trends and content which actually did go viral as well as Utrecht University researcher Linda Börzsei’s article, "Makes a Meme Instead: A Concise History of Internet Memes,” it can be clearly observed that the results of the emotion experiments were very similar to real life occurrences. In 2010, a camper at Yosemite National Park posted a video in which he showed a full double rainbow after a shower at the park. He can be heard declaring his emotions of wonder and awe as he gazes at the rainbow and even starts crying later in the video. Even though the reason for this emotional outburst was not something one would normally shed tears for, the video became one of the most popular memes in internet history with the original video accumulating over 40 million views. It was a combination of the camper’s emotions, which is clearly expressed within the video, and the emotions it triggered within the viewers of the video which led to its rapid climb to virality. This adds even more to the current understanding of how the internet population receives various types of content. 

To gain more information on meme reception, I performed a case study which monitored the social media trends from popular hubs such as Reddit, 4chan, and Facebook. Observations of the front pages of each of the websites occurred over a period of 3 hours each and the number of meme-relates posts were recorded with a page refresh taking place every 5 minutes. The results from this case study support the claim that popular memes are created by a combination of repeatability, nonintentional creation, and emotional connections. On Reddit, at least one meme-related discussion thread was found on the front page during each page refresh for the 3 hours of observation time. On over 75% of occasions, these threads were the highest rated threads on the page. After analyzing each post, it was found that every meme exhibited at least one of the three fundamental traits of successful memes. A similar result was observed during the 4chan case study. However, in this case, over 5 meme-related posts could be found during each page refresh. These results were expected though, as 4chan itself is an image board dedicated to the discussion of social trends and popular internet culture. Another difference in this case was an amplification of memes which do not gain virality but instead, are repeated only within certain post threads. In short, the maximum popularity they gained was still confined within the comments section of that particular post. These memes focused more on the repeatability factor without meeting the requirements set by the social norms of the time for the other traits. Facebook was the only site which was significantly different during observations compared to Reddit and 4chan. Facebook did not exhibit the same number of meme-related posts as the other two with an average of 0.63 posts per page refresh. Furthermore, the memes which were found on Facebook appeared to consist more of the general type which did meet all 3 trait requirements. This was probably the case because of the Facebook user population. With Facebook itself being more accessible, younger people are using the site and in general, this population seems to sway towards memes which are already popular rather than raising obscure memes to the point of virality. 

An image can turn into a meme at any time and with no prior warning at all. However, we can finally understand why this happens. A mixture of key characteristics, ease of recreation, serendipitous creation, and emotional influence, play a paramount role in determining how popular a meme will get. A meme will have the highest chance of going viral if and only if it possesses all these necessary traits; this is a trend of internet culture which has been constant across all of the social media sites. Memes may seem completely random, but in fact, they can be predicted. Training a computer to recognize the key traits found in most memes, researchers were able to analyze hundreds of photos as well as accurately determine which ones would eventually gain popularity. Although trending memes may seem as if they can just pop out of the blue, it is no longer so much of a mystery why. 



Works Cited

Dailymail.com, Stacy Liberatore. "What Makes a Meme: Scientists Reveal the Secret to 
What Causes Images to Go Viral." Mail Online. Associated Newspapers, 2015. Web. 
21 Nov. 2016.

Gleick, James`. "What Defines a Meme?" What Defines and Meme? Smithsonian, May 2011. 
Web. 21 Nov. 2016. 

Hellyer, Isabelle. "We Asked a 'Meme Scientist' What Makes a Meme Go Viral | VICE | United 
States." VICE. N.p., 2015. Web. 21 Nov. 2016.

Larkin, Ryan. "From Harlem Shake to RickRoll - Here's What Makes Memes Go Viral." 
Business Insider. Business Insider, Inc, 2014. Web. 21 Nov. 2016. 
Linda K. Börzsei. "Makes a Meme Instead: A Concise History of Internet Memes" New Media 
Studies Magazine Iss. 7 (2013) 

O'Neale, Rosalie. "Kids online: The statistics." KidsMatter. N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Dec. 2016.

Rosanna E. Guadagno, Daniel M. Rempala, Shannon Murphy, Bradley M. Okdie, What makes 
a video go viral? An analysis of emotional contagion and Internet memes, Computers 
in Human Behavior, Volume 29, Issue 6, November 2013, Pages 2312-2319, ISSN 
0747-5632, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.04.016.

Shubek, Keith, and Stephanie Huette. Predicting Meme Success with Linguistic Features in a 
Multilayer Backpropagation Network. MindModeling. N.p., n.d. Web.

Weng, Lilian, Filippo Menczer, and Yong-Yeol Ahn. "Virality Prediction and Community 
Structure in Social Networks." Sci. Rep. Scientific Reports 3 (2013): n. pag. Web.
