---
layout: post
title:  "Rhetorical Precis"
categories: General
author: Ethan Mui
highlight: true

---

Nicholas Carr, from *The Atlantic*, argues the disadvantages of relying on technology and the internet to ease humanity’s ability to learn and absorb information in his article, “Is Google Making Us Stupid.” He is emphasizing that the more we rely on technology to do the work for us, the less our brains actually belong to us and innovations in technology have caused the human mind to plateau in its ability to stay focused. This claim is supported by both personal anecdotes and those of other writers. Carr himself recalls times when he felt as if reading a long passage was too much work when the answer to any problem could be found with an intermittent Google search. Talking to other bloggers and authors, he found that this is commonplace among his peers. I feel that Carr had a purpose to writing this text and that purpose was to try to bring the idea of the internet not necessarily being a good thing to light. Most people today would say that technology is a blessing and modern life would not be possible without it. This is true, but with the advancement of society comes the downfall of human intellectual ability. This article was probably meant for those who also find themselves relying on Google to the point where just reading a normal text is too much work. Carr establishes a mutual relationship with the reader, showing that even professional writers as himself are feeling the effects of the modern world. This work is significant in that it poses a problem which mankind must find a solution for soon. With computers increasing in processing power at an astounding rate, it won’t be long until artificial intelligence begins to outpace human intelligence, and with human intellect dropping because of these advancements, this could be extremely problematic to solve.  
